---
layout: post
title:      "Connecting Sinatra With the Past"
date:       2019-09-26 13:50:35 +0000
permalink:  connecting_sinatra_with_the_past
---


I've always enjoyed working with information in formats other than rhetorical prose.  Before starting my classes with Flatiron I freelanced as a home designer, preparing construction documents for builders and remodelers.  The experience of reading —and indeed drawing— a set of blueprints is unique.   Plans aren’t read from beginning-to-end: you jump around the document, looking at the back of the building, then the kitchen, then perhaps the master bathroom, then probably the kitchen again (because hey.. everyone loves the thought of a new kitchen..).

Before working in home design I worked in the woods in Northern British Columbia, managing tree-planting and stand-tending crews.  Up there a different kind of information ruled the Keep:  maps.  Everything you ever needed, either for work or for your time off, would be found on a map.  Navigating the byzantine complex of logging and service roads to find your way to the right worksite, or to even just find your way back to town sometimes, would require at least a modest mastery in map-reading.
	
Before working in the woods during my summers between college semesters (I know… there is a point to this… we’re almost there) I graduated from the Royal Conservatory in solo piano performance.  Piano practice, and the subsequent classical-music nerdom that tagged along as its sidekick, consumed my highschool years (“why worry about girls when you can stay at home and listen to Shostakovitch’s War Symphony?? “).  As you advance through the conservatory, you start doing a lot more than just practicing scales and your selected exam pieces.  Music history, counterpoint, and composition all start taking up much (nay, all!) of your free time - as does analysis.

	
Music analysis is just what it sounds: take a piece of music and explain how it’s built: describe what key signatures are used and how; locate and describe the different melody subjects and track how they modulate from key to key; locate the partitions between any development and recapitulation sections; locate and track motifs as they relate to other subject lines… it can get pretty nuts, especially when working with larger works like a 4-part Mozart String Quartet, or something impossibly dense like a French Keyboard Suite by JS Bach.  Although when you listen to music it is very linear experience (one second after the other), analyzing music is very different.  Sure, you start at the beginning, but you almost immediately flip to the back to see how the work ends.  Then you start scribbling annotations in the middle somewhere- in hopes of finding an easy nugget of digestible information about the work that you can then run with, extrapolating and pulling apart more and more of the work until it is fully spun out with nothing more to glean.  
Spending hours everyday on a piano bench is not that dissimilar to sitting in front of a computer, albeit a little easier on the eyes.  This point— the one about the eyes —is where we’re supposed to finally be.  Reading music —just like coding— is a lot of work, and it makes a difference whether you’re reading out of a photocopied 3-ring binder or, say, from a publication by Henle Verlag - one of the world’s most esteemed music publishing houses, renowned for their authentic editions of classical music compositions.  Not only has Henle Verlag made a mark in music history with it’s meticulous editorial scrutiny, their work stands out as being absolutely gorgeous.  The quality of their finished product - the readability of the actual notes on the paper - is simply second-to-none.  I’ve had a mild man-crush for Henle Verlag since I was about 16.
I knew I wanted to try and tie my personal history with music back into some kind of submitted work at Flatiron.  The non-linear approach to wiring up application code rings in my ears like a sweet morning church bell. Coding has SO many similarities to music and music analysis… purpose is found in the execution, not in the data itself; elements make sense only when put in context with the whole; established axioms are used to create larger frameworks of defined logic…OMG my head is about to explode.  Needless To Say, I’m really glad I’ve been able to make a connection through playing around with Henle Verlag’s online catalogue for my Sinatra App.  
I call my app the “Henle Commentor”, since the initial intent of it was to provide a hypothetical complementary user-comments platform to the publisher’s catalog.  Overall, I am pretty satisfied with the result.  I tried to go a bit beyond the minimum scope of the project requirements, which resulted in discovering how to iterate out nested erb views into a primary view file, callbacks to control conditional nokogiri scraping methods inside model classes, and as many short-cuts to get operable and half-decent HTML/CSS as I could muster.  There are some functionality limitations to it that I would have liked to bring on board, but I’m at a point with the app now where I’m more excited to achieve that sense of completeness in rails than to try and hash over it further in Sinatra.

Classical music is freaking awesome.  If you dig ruby, sinatra and all the rest of this brain-logic coding jazz, then Mozart and Bach are now your new heroes.  It was a real treat for me to be able to connect these two fields.  I hope the rest of my Flatiron school classmates are able to make amazing connections of their own.

	
	
